+++
title = "Roundup 002 - March 2020"
date = "2020-03-03T21:09:55-05:00"
publishdate = ""
draft = true

description = "This is for google search snippets."

summary = "This is the preview text. [Continue Reading]"

tags = ["Sample","Two"]

[author]
    name = "Roman"

+++

## Why the GOV.UK Design System team changed the input type for numbers
[https://technology.blog.gov.uk/2020/02/24/why-the-gov-uk-design-system-team-changed-the-input-type-for-numbers/](https://technology.blog.gov.uk/2020/02/24/why-the-gov-uk-design-system-team-changed-the-input-type-for-numbers/)

The GDS always has smart and insightful write ups of how and why to make the web a better place. Their rational for changing the numbers input on government sites is a great read very much related to error management and accessibility. So relevant, I'm just going to quote it at length:

> Numbers are one of the most commonly asked for pieces of data, typically used in dates. We know from user research that some users prefer the large buttoned number keyboard (resembling a telephone keypad) for entering numbers on mobile. Until now, the GOV.UK Design System date input component used the HTML element `<input type="number">` to provide this number keypad when a user enters dates. Although we have user research from 2017 that didn’t flag any major issues with `<input type="number">`, we identified many usability problems with this input type.

### 1. Accessibility
We found that `<input type="number">`: 

* cannot be dictated or selected when using Dragon Naturally Speaking
* appears as unlabeled in NVDA's element list
* appears as a spin button in NVDA's object navigation, which has an edit field and two buttons inside - those buttons are unlabeled, but decrease/increase the value
* is reported as unlabeled edit field when using nvda+tab

### 2. Incrementable numbers
It's reasonable to assume that `<input type="number">` can be used for collecting any numeric data: it contains the word “number”, after all. However, a note in the HTML specification states that `<input type="number">` is “not appropriate for input that happens to only consist of numbers but isn't strictly speaking a number”.

This means that `<input type="number">` can only be used for incrementable numbers, such as dates or the number of people in a household. Using `<input type="number">` for collecting numbers that are not incrementable can cause problems with browsers validating them in that way.

For example, browsers attempt to round large numbers when incrementing or decrementing (pressing up or down key), and in the case of very large numbers they are converted to exponential notation.


Chrome 79.0: type=number displays large numbers in exponential format if user presses the up or down arrows on their keyboard
Once the number is parsed by the browser as an exponent, as shown above, and possibly by mistake, the action cannot be reversed by the user. This could confuse users. 

### 3. Letters 
The HTML spec states that when using `<input type="number">`, “user agents must not allow the user to set the value to a non-empty string that is not a valid floating-point number”. The web and Android versions of Chrome implement this by silently discarding all letter input except the letter ‘e’.

This means users are not given feedback on what type of characters `<input type="number">` accepts, and assistive technologies don’t alert the user that their input has been silently discarded.

### 4. Scrolling 
Users can accidentally increase or decrease the number using the scroll wheel on the mouse or the scroll gesture on their trackpad. This feature can be useful when collecting countable data but bad if entering data such as passport numbers.

<hr>

